Located in the western Pacific Ocean,
the Mariana Trench
is the deepest known location on earth.
To help you get an idea of its depth,
imagine that you could stack
the Empire State Building
in the trench.
It would take 25 such buildings to go
from the bottom of the trench
before you would reach sea level.
It is also one of the deadliest places
on earth.
Why is that?
In a word—pressure.
The crushing pressure, water pressure,
on the floor of the trench
is more than eight tons per square inch.
Now, to give you some idea,
that would be the equivalent
of having about 50 jumbo jets
on top of you.
Surely no life could live in that trench.
At least that’s what scientists thought.
But they were wrong.
When they finally developed a submersible
that would take them down into the trench,
they found life teeming
—and not just surviving but thriving.
Now, how is that possible?
It’s possible, friends,
because Jehovah, our Creator,
knows how to deal with pressure.
Jehovah knows how to deal with pressure.
And this is a fact
that should be comforting to all of us.
Why?
Because the pressure
in this system of things is increasing
—strain, stress, anxiety—
for all people at all levels.
And the Bible tells us
that these pressures are likely
to increase in the near future.
But the good news is
that Jehovah does more than
just equip his servants to survive.
He can actually make one thrive.
Here’s an example.
Try this on for pressure.
You’re surrounded by men who hate you.
In addition to hunting you down
with a view to taking your life,
they’ve spread slander and lies
about you everywhere.
Your name has become a reproach.
When people see you coming,
they turn and run the other way
because they feel that your time is short
and they don’t want to be caught
in the crosshairs.
Wherever you look,
it seems like terror is waiting for you.
And as a result of these problems,
you’re struggling with depression.
Your own sins are staring you in the face.
The whole experience
has taken a toll on your health.
You can’t sleep.
Your stamina is shot.
Your body is wasting away.
Now, that was David’s situation,
and you can read about it at Psalm 31:10-13.
The pressure was real
—no question about it.
David’s feelings were real
—no question about that.
But something else was very real.
And that was Jehovah.
And so Jehovah
was where David would turn to.
Let’s turn to his words in Psalm 31.
Psalm 31—and note his humble prayer
beginning in verse 14.
He said: “But I trust in you, O Jehovah,
“I declare: ‘You are my God.’
“My days are in your hand.
“Rescue me from the hand of my enemies
and from those persecuting me.
“Make your face shine upon your servant.
Save me by your loyal love.”
David’s life experiences
had taught him the value of turning to God
and pouring out his heart in times of trial.
And he absolutely knew that prayer,
coupled with implicit trust and patience,
would always bring Jehovah’s blessing.
And you see, friends,
the key to not just surviving
but thriving under extreme pressure
is to have the internal pressure
equal to the external.
And when this is true,
there is no amount of pressure
that can crush you.
So in a spiritual sense,
David received the internal fortitude
or, as some say,
“the intestinal fortitude,”
meaning “the courage and the strength
that would make him equal
to the pressure weighing in on him.”
And how do we know that he received that?
Well, let’s go back to Psalm 31
for just a moment.
If you look in verse 21, notice now
the change.
He says: “May Jehovah be praised,
“for in a wonderful way,
he has shown his loyal love to me
in a besieged city.”
And then in verse 23:
“Love Jehovah, all you who are loyal to him!
Jehovah protects the faithful.”
And finally in verse 24:
“Be courageous, and may your heart be strong,
all you who are waiting for Jehovah.”
So, you see, David
received an answer to his prayer
—his prayer coupled with his faith
and his patience.
He was waiting on Jehovah.
And Jehovah helped him not only to survive
but to thrive.
And he added joy to David
because David went on
to find joy and happiness
in his responsibilities and privileges.
So, what do we learn?
(1) David was able to face the pressure
because he had
an unshakable faith in Jehovah,
(2) David’s relationship with Jehovah
brought him the patience to wait on God,
and (3) when a loyal servant of God
humbly turns to Jehovah for help,
it is Jehovah’s own loyal love
that has the effect
of equalizing the pressure.
And, you know, there’s something else.
David’s experience in the trench
reached further than he ever knew.
Jonah, while in the belly of the great fish,
cited words from Psalm 31.
Jeremiah, who had
many trialsome times in his life,
often echoed phrases from Psalm 31.
And Jesus Christ himself,
the very Son of God—
His final words from the stake
were a quotation from Psalm 31:5.
So Jesus must have meditated
on this many times.
And so, friends, like David, Jonah, Jeremiah,
Jesus, and many, many others
—they all trusted in Jehovah,
and Jehovah never failed
to make them equal to the pressure.
He’ll do the same for you.
And so in conclusion,
you see, it really doesn’t matter
how great the pressure is.
It only matters where the pressure lies.
Do not let it come between you
and Jehovah
and your worship and service.
Don’t let it come between you,
because then the external pressure
will only continue to move you closer
to your heavenly Father.
The life that flourishes
in the Mariana Trench gives
a positive example, a beautiful example,
of Jehovah’s limitless ability
to help his creation
deal with pressure.
Prayer, trust, and patience
will always be rewarded by Jehovah.
Relief will come.
So remain close to your heavenly Father,
and you will not just survive
the pressure in the trench
but you will thrive spiritually.